# Lab: Add Capacitor Platforms

In this lab, you will:

- Update the Capacitor configuration
- Add the iOS and Android platforms
- Update the splash screen and application icon
- Build and run the application on both platforms

## Update the Configuration

When a Capacitor platform is added or updated, information in the `capacitor.config.ts` file is used to generate some of the project files. Some of this information should be changed up front:

- The `appId` should be changed to something unique like `com.kensodemann.teataster`
- The `appName` should be checked to ensure it is correct

Here is an example of those changes:

**Before:**

```typescript
import { CapacitorConfig } from '@capacitor/cli';

const config: CapacitorConfig = {
  appId: 'io.ionic.starter',
  appName: 'tea-taster',
  webDir: 'www',
  server: {
    androidScheme: 'https',
  },
};

export default config;
```

**After:**

```typescript
import { CapacitorConfig } from '@capacitor/cli';

const config: CapacitorConfig = {
  appId: 'com.kensodemann.teataster',
  appName: 'Tea Taster',
  webDir: 'www',
  server: {
    androidScheme: 'https',
  },
};

export default config;
```

The `appId` required a change in order to make it globally unique. Typically, you would use your company's domain in reverse order followed by the name of the application without spaces or punctuation. In this case, I made a reverse domain out of my name and added a variation of the application name.

I also decided to change the actual application name. This is the name displayed under the icon when installed on your device. In either case, they can be changed after the platforms are generated by updating this file _and_ the native projects, but it is easiest to do now before the native projects have been created.

Make similar changes to your application.

## Add the Android and iOS Platforms

Before adding any Capacitor platforms, you need to make sure that your application has been built. If it has not been built, the `www` directory will not exist and the attempt to add the platform will fail (ignore the build warnings that are produced, we will fix those later).

```bash
npm run build
```

Now you can add both the Android and iOS platforms.

```bash
ionic cap add android
ionic cap add ios
```

Once the platforms are added, open the native projects, each in their own IDE.

```bash
ionic cap open android
ionic cap open ios
```

**Note:** you need to have Android Studio installed if you want to build on Android. You need to be using a Mac that has Xcode properly installed in order to build for iOS.

## Update the Splash Screen and Application Icon

Capacitor has a tool called <a href="https://www.npmjs.com/package/@capacitor/assets" target="_blank">`@capacitor/assets`</a> that creates all of the icons that the native applications need. This tool will also generate the icons that are needed if we decide to deploy our application as a PWA.

In order to use this tool, we need to install it as a dev dependency:

```bash
npm i -D @capacitor/assets
```

Next, get the source image files that we need. Note that this is just our "product logo" in two versions, one for light mode and one for dark mode. Dark mode is optional.

- create a `resources` directory at the root level of the application (`mkdir resources`)
- download the following images to the newly created `resources` directory
  - <a download href="/assets/packages/ionic-angular/logo.png">
      logo.png
    </a>
  - <a download href="/assets/packages/ionic-angular/logo-dark.png">
      logo-dark.png
    </a>

To generate the required resources and copy them to the native projects, use the following command:

```bash
npx capacitor-assets generate --iconBackgroundColor '#f1ebe1' --splashBackgroundColor '#f1ebe1' --iconBackgroundColorDark '#110b00' --splashBackgroundColorDark '#110b00'
```

**Pro Tip:** the `@capacitor/assets` package is updated from time to time. As a result, you may want to regenerate the icons and splash screen from time to time. To make this easier, add the command to your `package.json` `scripts`:

```json
  "scripts": {
    "assets": "capacitor-assets generate --iconBackgroundColor '#f1ebe1' --splashBackgroundColor '#f1ebe1' --iconBackgroundColorDark '#110b00' --splashBackgroundColorDark '#110b00'",
    ...
  },
```

When you want to regenerate the assets, you just need to remember `npm run assets`, and not the whole `capacitor-assets` command.

**Note:** Don't see the splash screen? Find out why in the "Extra Credit" section.

## Update NPM Scripts

I like to have my build ensure that that web-app and plugins are up to date in my native applications. For this reason, I do a `cap sync` with every build. This ensures my native projects are always up to date. I have also added the `--configuration production` flag so that I always get a production build.

```json
  "scripts": {
    "assets": "capacitor-assets generate --iconBackgroundColor '#f1ebe1' --splashBackgroundColor '#f1ebe1' --iconBackgroundColorDark '#110b00' --splashBackgroundColorDark '#110b00'",
    "build": "ng build --configuration production && cap sync",
    "lint": "ng lint",
    "ng": "ng",
    "prepare": "husky install",
    "start": "ng serve",
    "test": "ng test",
    "watch": "ng build --watch --configuration development"
  },
```

At this point, perform an `npm run build` and then open either the Android or iOS native project and run the application on a device or emulator. The app should have the updated icon, and it should run normally. Let's stage all of our files and commit them to the git repo at this point (I suggest doing that at the end of every lab).

## Live Reload (Optional)

Now that the projects are set up and building properly, you can use Ionic's "live reload" feature if you would like to. This feature allows you to run the application on your device and then rebuild and reload the application on your device as you develop. This is similar to `ionic serve` but is running the application on your device(s) instead of the browser.

```bash
ionic cap run android --livereload --external
ionic cap run ios --livereload --external
```

These commands start a dev server that monitors changes to the Ionic project. It will then perform a `sync` operation, build the native app, and run it on a device. Once that is done, when you change the Ionic application it will be rebuilt and reloaded on the device(s).

## Conclusion

In this lab we learned how to add iOS and Android platforms and how to build the application for those platforms.
